---
title: "Linux CLI 1"
date: 2023-11-11T00:00:00
author: Cat
tags: [cli,linux,terminal]
categories: "Linux"
featured: "false"
type: "intro"
thumbnail: /tutorials/linux-cli1-20231111/linux-cli1-icn-20231111.png
articleImage: /tutorials/linux-cli1-20231111/linux-cli1-banner-20231111.png
draft: "false"
linktitle: "linux-cli"
---

# Linux Command Linux Interface(CLI)
CLI a interface that predates modern GUI interfaces and in many ways is more powerful that many GUI tools provided on a system. However that comes with a increased bar of entry for knowledge required for how to navigate a CLI environment. So for this first part I wanted to talk about what is most important with CLI environment.

Some basic do's and don't before we start talking more in depth about what CLI can actually achieve. No matter if you are a user that only plans to touch the Terminal Command Linux only when you absolutely must or a user that wants to get better at it and use it more frequently I hope some of the knowledge here will apply to both groups.

So onto my main do's and dont's of CLI environment.

# Running commands from the internet

## Dont's:

**NEVER EVER** run a command from the internet, that you do not understand. Okay now that's out of the way let me clarify, I am not saying do not ask for help, or do not search for solutions to your problems. Just that if the solution is a command that you found online you shouldn't just run it blindly for several reasons.

1. It may be a troll that posted it looking to mess with you although this isn't common some people will mess with newbies to be cruel.
2. It may be harmful to your PC in another way.
3. It may fix your issues at the time but without a proper understanding of how the command works it may not always fix your issue and then you will be back at square one.
4. Even if the person is not trying to harm your system they still might through their own lack of knowledge(I've been guilty of this myself in the past may not have meant to make things worse but I did).


## Do's:
However still feel free to ask questions. As they are paramount to you learning in some ways and seek out your own answers to. Just when someone telly you "Hey run this command.". Just take a little bit of extra time to understand what they have just told you to run. There are several ways do to this most commands either have a manual page or a well written help menu that explains what they are. 

Checking these before you run a command you found online is good as it gives you an idea of what you are running before you actually run the command. These can be accessed by, running `cmdname --help` for the help menu or `man cmdname` for the manual page. These pages will explain what a command is what it does and what options it has.

And of top of that if you did run a command and it did fix your problems but you don't understand how or what it did take the time to ask. What that command was and how it worked. As knowing things like this can help you fix problems on your own in the future and support other new people that may not know yet.

