---
title: "C Tutorials 1"
date: 2023-11-11T00:00:00
author: Cat
tags: [cource,programming,c]
categories: "Programming-in-C"
featured: "false"
type: "intro"
thumbnail: /tutorials/c-20221030/c-icn-20221030.png
articleImage: /tutorials/c-20221030/c-banner-20221030.png
draft: "false"
linktitle: "c-tutorial-1"
---

# C Tutorial 1:
Hey all this is a series I wanted to start on programming in C and hopefully encourage some people to get into coding the same way I was encouraged.

Now this week I figured I would talk about what do you need to compile C code and maybe a small simple first program at the end. So essentially if you want to follow along by the end of this you should have a working tool chain for producing C applications.

# Definitions:
Below are some definitions for words I am going to say below but don't want to confuse anyone. These are over simplified but it's not important to know what they mean in depth so quickly.
- Machine code(The language that computers understand)
- binary/program an executable typically called.exe on windows.
- library basically a set of code that anyone can use in their programs
- standard library a library that is provided with a programming language
- compiler a program that translates human readable code into machine code object files
- linker a program that object files and links them together into one program or library
- syntax the almost grammar rules of a programming language
- scope how long something stay alive for

# How does C work
Well C is programming language designed to be easy for humans to read while also maintaining a connection to low level concepts, and giving you the programmer complete control. This can be seen as when C was first released to world in 1969 it didn't even have a standard library, if you wanted to do something you had to implement it yourself.

Of course that early version of C is nothing like the modern C language we have today. As we now have a standard library that makes certain things easier and quicker and the C std library is generally good at implementing mostly things you are going to want anyway like printing to screen.

C works by allowing a human to write to code in  human readable language with a set of rules(syntax) and then feed that code into a compiler to produce unreadable machine code object files. Then those object files are put into linker to link all of them together and make them into a binary.

Once we have that binary we can run it on our system it will **hopefully** do what we wanted it to do.

# How do I setup the tools I need?

### Windows:
For Windows I know of Cygwin and Mingw which provide compiler tool chains and nice ways to use them. Cygwin has a good install guide and I will link that [here](https://cygwin.com/install.html). When installing Cygwin the packages you will need is gcc and gcc-core. Another advantage is Cygwin will give you a Linux like terminal which will make following my terminal commands easier as I will be doing them in a Linux format.

alternatively if you want there is the MSVC compiler that comes bundled with Visual Studio from Microsoft but as I've never used it I can neither recommend as I have no experience.

### Linux:
Below is how to install the needed development tools on a few different Linux systems I am aware of if your system is not listed you can likely just search online "<DISTRO NAME> install dev tools", and find the command syntax you need just make sure you trust where you get commands from and only run it once you understand it.

##### Ubuntu/most of debian:
```
    sudo apt install build-essential
```

##### Fedora:
```
    sudo dnf group info "C Development Tools and Libraries"
```

##### Arch linux:
```
    sudo pacman -S base-devel
```

##### Void linux:
```
    sudo xbps-install -S base-devel
```

## Programs Installed:
Okay now that you have the tool chain installed on your system we are going to write are first very basic program that most programmers start with. Hello World!

So to start open up a text editor and from past experience I have to say this this Microsoft Word and similar programs are not text editors, please don't use them for this. You want something more akin to notepad however an easy and nice feature full one is Visual Studio Code.

With your text editor of choice open we are ready to write code. Below is a basic hello world program in C.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
    
int main() {
    printf("Hello, World!\n");

    return 0;
}
```
Before we get to compiling the program I want to explain it as being able to copy code I post here is one thing anyone can do to program yourself. 

You need to be able to understand the code that is posted here and through this understand you will be able to adapt code and make new code that no one has showed you before as it will be yours.

First: `#include <stdio.h>` this a preprocessor directive in C basically something that happens before the program even begins compiling. This one includes the standard io header(stdio.h) file into our source file. This is needed as it's where `printf` is defined.

Second: `int main() {` this is a function declaration in C. Basically we are telling the compiler the main function starts here. But to break it down further.

`int` is the return type of the function basically what it returns int stands for Integer like a number.

`main` this is the functions name this is how you what you will use to refer to the function inside the program. Main is a special function as the C standard library I mentioned before is where the program actually start and main is the first piece of code we write that it will call.

`()` inside these brackets are the function arguments they are left blank as I will teach about args in a moment.

`{` finally this just notes the actual start of the function so where we can write code to be placed in the main function.

Third: `printf("Hello, World!\n");` Here we are calling the `printf` function. This means control is handed over to the `printf` function for a moment. You may have noticed that we put "Hello, World!" as an argument for `printf`. This is the formatted string(yes that is f in printf stands for) that will be printed by the function. Arguments are essentially ways of passing data from one function to another. The \n is a special character which means new line it will make the terminal go down a line. The ';' on the end of the line denotes the end of that statement in C statements are denoted to end with ';'.

Fourth: `return 0` this is where we hand control back over the standard library function that called main for is and we return 0 back to it. 0 in C as a return value is generally treated as success. So we are basically returning to the C library and saying "Hey our program ran okay". 

Fifth: `}` this bracket is paired with the one we defined main with basically it lets the compiler know hey this is the end of the main function.

Now if you save this file as hello.c and open a terminal in the same folder you can compile the code with the below command. This will compile and link your object file into a binary called hello.
```sh
    gcc hello.c -o hello
```

and now to run it go back to your terminal 

```sh
    ./hello
```
and you should see "Hello, World!" printed back at you. Now I hate to do this but I find it's important to explore and experiment on your own as a way to learn and understand. So below are some challenges that I want you to try and do. Some uses functions I've shown you today others you will need to break out google for. So don't feel bad of you need to look up answers. It's part of programming.

1. Chang what Message is printed to say something else of your choosing.

2. Use printf format string to print a formatted message (You'll need a look on the internet for this one)
