---
title: "Assembly Development"
date: 2023-04-16T00:00:00
author: Cat 
tags: [programming,assembly,low-level]
categories: "Assembly Development"
featured: "false"
type: "intro"
thumbnail: /tutorials/asm-20230416/asm-icn-20230416.png
articleImage: /tutorials/asm-20230416/asm-banner-20230416.png
draft: "false"
linktitle: "assembly-chapter0"
---
## preface:
Primarily I will be discussing X86 assembly as I want this tutorial to be open to everyone and while ARM and RISC-V machines are becoming more popular there is still a long way to go, before you can just assume someone owns one. So I will try to keep information in here as general as possible but will often focus on what can be done with x86 assembly so if a reader wishes to try something at home they are able to without needing to buy any additional hardware they may or may not already have.(RPI, Vision-Five or other non x86 computers)

## _start(What is assembly?): 
So to start with calling assembly a single programming language is a little bit of misnomer. Rather Assembly is a family languages, typically considered to be one step above raw machine code. 

As such each processor architecture typically will have it's own assembly language. That will work on that architecture of processors. As such not everything will apply to every processor. But once you learn one assembly language others should be easier to pick up.

As while machine code presents as raw instruction opcodes, Assembly will abstract some of that into a more friendly easy to read(for humans) instructions so instead of having to write `0xeb 0xfe`(x86) into a binary file to loop endlessly you can just write `jmp $`(x86).

I'm aware that some of the readers who come from higher level languages probably think just that snippet of assembly is much harder to read than any modern language as in modern code terms `jmp $`(x86). Can be thought as an empty while loop with 1 passed as it's conditional it will always be true and jump back to it's start. 

But to break this instruction down `jmp` can be read as a shortened down way to say jump and `$` in x86 assembly is essentially a way to say the current code position, or in opcodes `0xeb = jump` `0xfe = -2` as the instruction is two bytes long. So it's essentially just say jump here.

## How does Assembly code work?
Assembly code essentially works the same way any other code does except just on a much lower level. This comes with huge advantages and disadvantages to the programmer.

Allowing developers to choose what to store in individual registers of the processor and how those values will be used. Along with directly accessing raw memory of the computer. So lets go over some concepts. 

### What's a Register?
Registers are essentially just small storage built directly into your processor and can be used to store variables internally for fast access. 

An example would be in X86 you have the AX,CX,BX and DX as the four general purpose registers each are 16-bit wide and can essentially be thought of as a built in `int16_t`. in 32-bit an 64-bit processors they are extended by prefixing them with E(32-bit) and R(64-bit) to access their 32 and 64 bit space as well.

So as an example you could call an assembly instruction such as `mov rax,0xcafebabe` to store the hex value `0xcafebabe` in the RAX register for later use. And for example where that hexadecimal value is only 32-bit long you could also retrieve it by using the EAX register to access the lower 32-bits of RAX.

While some registers are given the names such as general purpose, stack pointer, index registers, the truth is you can almost always use them for anything you need to. But it's generally best to stick to what their jobs should be.

### Onto code:
So I've shown you small snippets of assembly code but so nothing that's really complete. So let's start with what everyone's first program should be "Hello world!". 

How to print to your screen will depend on you OS slightly as in Linux we would use `Syscall` in Windows `WriteFile`. 

I will be using 64-bit Linux code to do this using syscalls and the System-V ABI. Though it shouldn't be to hard to adapt this for any OS really. So with that in mind why don't we draft our first assembly program.

```asm
[bits 64]
section .data

string: db "Hello World"
length: dq $ - string ;calculate string length

section .text 
global _start 

_start: 
	
	;Write Syscall 
    mov rdi,1 ;RDI = arg 1 std out file no 
	mov rsi,string ;RSI = arg 2 buffer to print
	mov rdx,qword[length] ;RDX = arg 3 aka length to print from buffer 

   	mov rax,1 ;RAX = Syscall number 1 = write  
	
	syscall ;Call the system 

	mov rax,0x3c ;Exit Syscall 
	xor rdi,rdi ;Return code 

	syscall ;Call the system
```
### Building this code:
```
    nasm -felf64 main.asm -o main.o 
    ld.lld main.o -o main
```


### Breaking down this code into pieces:
So starting at the top `[bits 64]` is just used to tell my assembly nasm to generate 64-bit code. The `section` tag is a sort of pseudo instruction in that it's not some instruction that is used in the final binary but just defines something as a section i.e. defining that the code is in a section called `.text` and the data in `.data`.

The data definitions used here are quite simple we define a symbol by placing a colon after the symbol name. So `length, _start and string` are all symbols in the program though from out perspective we can see that `length and string` are symbols that lead to variables so like this C code `size_t length = 11;` and that `_start` is a function.

the `db` instruction is declaring bytes in the program directly I.E. it's declaring the ASCII bytes for "Hello World" and the `dq` is doing the same for a quad-word(64-bit int) for the length of the string and as you can see we used the `$` symbol again as we are using it in context to say that the length of the string is current position in memory minus the start position of the string.

onto section `.text` the `global _start` instruction again is something that doesn't end up in the final program kinda. As it just exposed the `_start` function globally and so the linker can see it during linking

Now finally real code the `mov` instructions are just used to move data from one location to another in this case we are moving values into the RAX, RDI, RSI and RDX registers. Then calling the `syscall` instruction which transfers control over the operating systems syscall handler function which will use the value in RAX to determine which syscall to call and will then use RDI, RSI and RDX registers as arguments to that sys call. 

Where we called it with `RAX=1` aka the write syscall we could say this is essentially equal to the C code `write (RDI, RSI, RDX);` Realistically we should do some error checking but it's fine in this case to assume it succeed. 

Then after that we move `0x3c(exit syscall)` into RAX and `xor` RDI by itself(setting it to 0) and call syscall again. The reason for this is we want to cleaning exit out program. as if we did not do this our program would segfault as the RIP pointer would increase passed our code. Or if we attempt to return we would be returning to whatever random address is on the stack. 

Essentially this is just the polite way to the inform the kernel that out program is going to be exiting now and it can revoke whatever it has given us and use it on other programs.

But there you have a basic introduction to assembly I will plan to go more into detail in the future we more tutorial but for now this should serve as a good first step.

Thanks for reading.
