---
title: "Pointers in C"
date: 2023-11-11T00:00:00
author: Cat
tags: [cource,programming,c]
categories: "Programming-in-C"
featured: "false"
type: "intro"
thumbnail: /tutorials/c-20221030/c-icn-20221030.png
articleImage: /tutorials/c-20221030/c-banner-20221030.png
draft: "false"
linktitle: "c-and-pointers"
---

# C and Pointers

Hey all I am Cat resident cursed bean here and I LOVE C POINTERS. So I wanted to have a brief little tutorial, on how they work covering various misconceptions I have seen people display on the topic of pointers.


## Things I've been asked or told

Now a foreword around things I've been asked or told about C:
**Q:** Aren't C pointers and C unsafe?

**A:** Yes totally though that in itself is not reason enough to never try something and it goes without saying C can be down in a safe manner. It's just with more responblitiy being placed on the developer to do so makes it more of a challenge to get it right.

**S:** You need to free every variable in C including `uint32_t`

**A:** No you don't need to manually free every variable. Firstly most modern kernels(Linux, BSD, Mac and even Windows) will perform memory clean up on client programs exited or being killed. That is to say the kernel keeps track of the memory it hands out and when every process that had access to it has died it will reclaim that memory on it's own. 

**A:** Second don't mistake this as me saying "don't use `free()` the kernel will do it for you!". Some variables will need to be freed that is true but not all of them do any variable that is not a pointer doesn't need to be freed arrays(defined at compiled time i.e. `int numbers[10]`) don't need freeing either. But pointer variables that have been initialized with malloc or some library function likely will. For malloc it's pretty easy as you called it directly so you know you have to free it, for however library functions the best thing to do is look at the libraries documentation and the function list provided and look for free function. 

**Q:** Overflowing a buffer in a structure will overwrite the other members!

**A:** It can. It depends how the buffer was defined and set for example below are two examples. Of how not to do this the first is a real world example I feel someone may fall into, the second is a more silly one that a friend brought up it's not something you are likely to run into in a real world case.
```c
struct bad_struct_1 {
    int buffer[2];
    int supersecretvar;
};

struct bad_struct_2 {
    int *buffer;
    int supersecretvar;
};

int main() {
    struct bad_struct_1 bs1 = { {0, 1}, 15 };
    struct bad_struct_2 bs2 = { 0, 15};
    
    bs1.buffer[3] = 2;
    bs2.buffer = &bs2.buffer;
    bs2.buffer[3] = 5;

}

```

## What is a pointer?
Well a pointer can be broken down into two bits, First is the data that it points to the, Second is the pointer itself. So lets start with the latter as I feel that is really easy to explain. 


### The pointer itself:
In computing you may have heard the term 32-bit, 64-bit or some other bit. This refers to the CPUs ability to handle 64-bit numbers and typically a 64bit memory bus as a **GROSS** oversimplification. So on a PC that is 64-bits with a 64-bit memory bust a pointer will typically just being `uint64_t`, in the sense that the `uint64_t` integer inside our pointer simply points to another location in memory.

what about on a non 64-bit system well in that case a pointer is likely to be however many bits that system is. So for a 32-bit CPU likely 32-bits for a pointer and for a 128bit CPU far off in the future it'll likely be 128bits

So how about an example? To try and make this sound less strange. Lets say I have a character pointer called `my_string` and that pointer was set to `0x1000`.
Now if I where to dereference that pointer(Access the data it points to), it's essentially the same as writing/reading data directly from an offset of 4096(0x1000)bytes into memory. For each offset you dereference you are essentially moving the point `X * sizeof(type)`bytes along in memory where X is the offset. See below for example bear in mind I said character pointer and a character is 1 byte wide in C. (Addresses are in Hex but decimal is in the brackets)

```c
    my_string[0] == Address 0x1000(4096)
    my_string[1] == Address 0x1001(4097)
    my_string[5] == Address 0x1005(4101)
```

But what if we had another pointer called numbers which is `uint32_t *` that pointed to address 0x2000? Well the same as the character pointer really except for each X into the offset we go we advance the pointer 4bytes instead. 4 bytes happening to be the size of a `uint32_t` see below for example.

```c
    numbers[0] == Address 0x2000(8192)
    numbers[1] == Address 0x2004(8196)
    numbers[5] == Address 0x2018(8216)
```


### The data it points to:
The data can be anything really. It could be a collections of ints, a linked list an array, or hell even a collection of other pointers. Or as I showed in the example above you can have a pointer point to itself.

But the important aspect of this data it may not be stored anywhere near where the pointer is stored in memory it could be stored directly next to the pointers address or it could be on the complete opposite end of memory. But the pointer does point to it making it accessible through it.

### Why do I have to free pointers?
Well in short you don't technically. But when a pointer has been allocated through the use of a function such as malloc, calloc or realloc. Or any function that allocates memory directly or indirectly it *should* be freed back the system memory when you are done with it. Using the associated free function for whatever function was called.

Now if you are a quick firing program for example something `ls` or `echo`there is a case to be made that no you don't have to free your memory as the kernel will do it when you quit anyway and freeing it during run time will just make your app slower. Which is technically true but I encourage doing it anyway just as it helps keep you in a good habit and it makes it easier for you to spot when you need to free pointers in your other programs.

However if you are a program such as sway, the X server, GDM or some other application that stays open for a long duration, it's important you free your allocated memory as for example complex apps like these will be running constantly and as such the kernel's ability to auto free their memory on quit likely won't happen at all. Thus when these applications are allocating framebuffers, data structures, etc... They need to free and keep track of what is no longer needed otherwise the system could easily run to a OOM(Out Of Memory) error due to all the system resources being hogged by out dated unused pointers.

## Wrap up:
Okay I am hoping I've helped showed you pointers aren't that scary not really anyway. They are just things that point a location in memory I know I didn't exactly go over how to allocate and check pointers but I am hoping to write a more coding focused tutorial on that at a later date this is just intended to make pointers a little more clear to people unfamiliar with them.

Thanks for reading the ramblings of a mad woman I'm off to go dereference NULL.
